---
layout: post
title: "Pairing"
description: ""
category: 
tags: []
---
{% include JB/setup %}

2012 was a huge year for me, I learned a ton and I want to capture some of that journey...

I was initially skeptical about pairing…it seems inefficient, right?  Two people doing one person's job?  After those 10000+ hours of practice, I had good habits and a nice track record working solo, even remotely, for years at a time.  I was productive even by my own standards and consistently exceeded expectations.  However, like many uncomfortable things over the past year; I was determined to give pairing my best shot.

After nine months of consistent pairing I've found it's probably the best way to write good software.  I think I was still on the fence until we had a couple weeks at work where only one of us was there consistently for various reasons (vacations, holidays) and I lost 2.5 hours on a typo.  Two hours beating my head against the wall for a typo in a javascript file.  I had good unit tests, I just fat fingered a method call.  It never would have happened if I had my pair there.  At that point it hit home - that's one of the many things a pair provides: an extra layer of checks, a smart compiler, sounding board, real-time code reviewer, todo list tracker.  It's so much harder to make stupid mistakes anymore, much harder to lose 3 hours going down the wrong path.  A pair stays focused; if one person's attention wanes, the other person picks them up.  I think once you pair with a person many times, you really get into a spot where you work very well together and fall into a natural rhythm, where you know who's ready to type right now and who's keeping an eye on things.  Who's focused on parens and who's thinking about the design and where you'll go next.  

It's kind of hard to find that rhythm, especially initially.  I had a hard time not having my hands on the keyboard.  I HAD to go home and hack a bit after work to stay sane.  I had transitioned directly from an environment where I was working 10, 11, 12 hours a day, just cranking out code every day.  To go from that to "taking turns", thinking about what you're doing, explaining decisions, and brainstorming - it's a big jump.

The hardest thing for me to learn was sitting back, letting someone else drive, not interrupting their every key press.  I'm horrible at this.  I'm bad about it in conversation, I'm bad about when pairing.  Luckily, I spend most of my time pairing with people that are easy-going and take my rudeness in stride.

I think the hardest thing about pairing is just keeping it going.  I think it's hard, especially at first.  You have to give it more than the 2 or 3 weeks you might commit to it starting out.  And there are times when pairing doesn't feel like the right thing to do.  I've sat there and written emails with my pair.  And it feels ridiculous.  Sure it's good from a communication standpoint and a knowledge transfer standpoint, like everyone is on the same page, but don't feel like I provided a lot of value looking up some items in an excel spreadsheet.  Likewise, there are some problems that are easier to deal with if you're not pairing.  We were searching for memory leaks and poring over heap dumps and log files.  It was good that we paired on it so everyone understood the techniques and what you're looking for, but you're sort of in what Andy Hunt would call an R-mode style of thinking where you're intuitively looking for something that grabs your attention while staring through these files, and it's a lot harder if you're trying to keep a stream of conversation going, you can't really get that flash of intuition that you're hoping to grab.

I think with anything, you should be pragmatic about it.  But when you're writing code, if you believe in code reviews or you think there's some need for everyone to understand what the code is doing or that it's up to a certain standard, then I think pairing is the easiest thing to do.  When I initially started pairing, my team was pretty dogmatic about pairing and three people would triple up and that was interesting, but HARD.  It's hard to keep 3 people on the same page (the communication paths have tripled!) , and generally one person would zone out of the conversation for awhile.  Nowadays I think I would lean towards a 2 and 1, probably encourage promiscuous pairing so you're swapping a lot and one person doesn't spend too much time on an island.  Even if that one person doesn't accomplish a lot or work as efficiently as the pair, I think that's probably better than trying to keep three people on the same page.  It's just a whole other dynamic.  You find yourself falling back on rudimentary pairing skills, doing a round-robin, where you would do ping-pong with two people, you'll do round-robin with three.  If you're writing code, if you're actively going somewhere I think it can work, but if you're designing or figuring out the problem - it's a committee at that point and you're going to have a hard time convincing everyone to do the same thing.  I think it's interesting and I've seen some mob coding which is just a fascinating thing to watch.  

It's interesting, how you can keep a constant flow of energy going for a long time, but when you step away you realize how much you've put into that and how burned out you are.  It's so hard sometimes, being in someone space that long all day.  I think that's why people burn out on pairing, just pairing for emergencies or when you're stuck.  It's hard to do the extra steps that are involved in keeping that communication pathway open between you and your pair.  Working at staying on the same page.  And compromising!  You'll see something shiny that catches your attention and your pair will see something else that catches their attention and it's just hard to keep track of all the lines of thought.  It was hard enough solo…I've always kept a notepad where I'd jot all my random thoughts and TODOs.  I remember coming back to those the next day and have no idea where I was going.  Then I find myself doing it for my pair, jotting down things they think of,  and it really doesn't make any sense because those thoughts were never in my head to start with.


Another difficulty in pairing comes when there are differences in personalities in pairs.  People have different work styles, different editors, there's just a lot of differences.  That's part of the attraction of pair programming, you're bringing together different experiences to bear so you have a larger solution set.  You don't both reach for the same solution...but if does certainly make it more difficult at times.  Some people have a higher threshold for boredom than other people do, some are far more thorough, some like tangential investigations, some like tweaking UI elements, and some just want to do the bare minimum to get to done.   That is a situation where you're going to have to compromise and hopefully you're in a situation where you can pair with a number of different people.   So if there is a person where you don't mesh that well, at least you don't work with that person everyday trying to accomplish something.  



I think even if two people can produce more code, I think there's something to be said for being accountable to your partner and how that constant code review keeps you honest.  If your team has committed to TDD or simple design, or anything where you have an extra responsibility to build a safety net and create readable code….even if you believe in these things you might hack a little bit and tell yourself you'll delete that later….but with a pair, you're in this together, we've committed to doing things the right way.  When you inevitably have to make compromises to pragmatism, you have that extra reassurance that it was a reasonable step to make and that you did attempt to find a better way.   

With pairing I was brought up to speed on a 80K line codebase to the level where I felt comfortable making big changes after a couple months.


It is interesting, where things come up and the ways that ideas form.  I think that's the thing people miss about pairs - just how quickly you can build an idea and how fast something just comes and the next person builds on it and it bounces back.  Very few people are good at fully forming an idea the first time.  You start with a half-baked notion, maybe a flash of intuition, and your pair just goes "Well…what if we did this?"  And then you go "Oh Yes, if we did that, then we can do this" and it just flows and you do spend a lot less time typing but you get so much more done.  Because as soon as one of us gets lazy and starts blindly writing getters and setters then the other asks "Why are we doing this?" and we'll come up with something smarter or find we didn't need it at all.  It's kind of amazing.

